My name is Steve Lewallen.
I'm the Engineering Manager for
Performance Tools.
So what do we have for you today?
Well, first up,
we're going to cover new workflow
improvements we've made to
Instruments to make your life using
the tool much more productive.
Secondly, we're going to cover a new
concept called strategies.
Third,
we're going to look at new profiling
API that we've added to allow you to
programmatically profile your own apps.
Then we're going to cover System Trace,
what's new, and do a deep dive on
how to use it and why.
And then we will cover our
network analysis instrumentation
that we've added for iOS.
And finally, we'll conclude with our
Arc support in Instruments.
So let's get started.
First of all,
we've added a new set of options
in a sheet on Instruments
to allow you to change,
for example,
the start time between the time
you hit the recording button and
when the recording actually starts.
This allows you to do any manual
setup you might have to do.
Then we've added the ability to
set a time limit on the recording,
say a maximum recording time,
at which point the recording
will automatically stop.
And finally,
we've added the ability to set deferred
mode on the sheet for the trace document.
Now, as I hope you know by now,
we have two major modes of
taking traces in Instruments.
One is a Median mode.
Now, a Median mode is when we
collect the data and we show
it to you on screen right away.
So you're profiling your app and you
do something and you see a spike in
allocations Instrument or time profiling,
you can associate that,
make a mental note, "Oh,
that's about the explosion
that just happened in my game.
I'm going to go back and look at
that." But we also have deferred mode.
Deferred mode is all about
reducing that observer effect.
Instruments is running on
the same system your app is.
In deferred mode,
you lose the immediate display,
but we take Instruments off
the CPU to a very great extent,
thus giving over more
resources to your app.
Now if you want to run in
deferred mode all the time,
you can do that too.
We have a new preference
in the Preferences pane.
Just check that and every new trace
document and every new recording
you take will be in deferred mode.
So we also have a new way to
trigger recording in instruments.
So let's say, regardless of whether you
have instruments in the
foreground or background,
you want to trigger a trace.
All you have to do is hit Control-Excape,
and you can modify that key
combo with this preference.
In the frontmost document,
in instruments,
we'll start recording or stop recording,
depending on what it was doing before.
It'll just toggle that setting.
So I like to do this, for example,
when I'm doing a system trace.
I like this because I have
instruments in the background,
and I'm bringing it to the foreground,
hitting the record button,
and then taking it back.
That does a lot of different
things to the system.
It keeps the Windows server busy,
et cetera.
So with Control-Excape,
with it already in the background,
we don't affect the system.
We've also added the ability to change
how the cores on your Mac behave.
So first of all,
we have the ability to turn on
and off hardware multi-threading.
We also have the ability to reduce the
number of active cores on your system.
This is a way to get
a rough approximation,
but approximation nevertheless of
how your app would perform on a
lesser system with fewer cores,
for example.
Now let's talk about Track Gestures.
So when we introduced System Trace
and a few other instruments,
we also introduced a much higher
resolution and time in the Track View.
Now we show data right down
to the nanosecond level.
And because of that,
that drove us to create new gestures,
which we think are so important we remind
you of what they are in the bottom right
hand corner of every Trace document.
So this allows you to directly
manipulate time in the track view.
So for example, if you want to zoom in,
you just hold the shift key down,
do a mouse drag, you'll get immediate
feedback about the scale,
that is time per pixel,
and how much the duration of time
you selected and release and then you
zoomed in precisely where you selected.
If you've zoomed in,
you'll probably want to zoom out,
so you can use control
and mouse drag to do that.
Simple.
We've also added a really cool new
feature called Snap Track to Fit.
Let's say that you have made a
recording that extends beyond the
visual range of the window or maybe it
doesn't fill up much of it and you just
want to get that trace just fitting
perfectly in your visible window.
Well, now you can do that with control
command Z and the track snaps to fit.
Great little feature,
I do it all the time,
and in deferred mode,
we do it for you automatically
at the end of the trace.
And finally, of course,
we've always had the
ability to filter in time,
and now you can use Option and
Mouse Drag to do that time filtering.
So those are track gestures.
Now let's move on to
Call Tree Data Mining.
So we've always had a powerful
set of options to do data
mining in the call tree view,
but now we've added
several more on focus.
So for example, you can focus on a
subtree of the call tree.
That's just to eliminate noise.
But even neater,
you can focus on all the calls,
for example, made by the selected symbol.
Or the inverse, who all calls the symbol?
Or even further, who all calls this
library or this framework?
So that's very handy when when you
want to see how your framework,
your library that you're
providing is doing.
So we've always had the ability
to filter in detail views.
This is a great feature.
It brings all the information you're
filtering to down to a concise list.
But you lose one important thing,
the context around what
you're filtering to.
And that can be as equally as important.
So now we have find.
It works just as you'd expect.
Hit Command-F and this little find
bar appears above your detail view.
You can search forward and backward
in outline views and table views.
And we'll even search inside of
unexpanded outline view nodes
and associated back traces.
That's very handy.
Now, incredibly minor but also
very useful is discontinuous
selection in all the detail views.
And now you can select things
and do shallow or deep copies.
and then paste it somewhere and
we will copy the column headers,
the contents of all the columns,
and the indentation level
of the outline view.
This is really helpful if, for example,
you want to share some performance
information with a colleague,
file a bug report,
or jot down a note to yourself.
So that is copying.
Now, we've had for a while now this great
ability to see performance data
right in line with your own source.
This is awesome because it
can say this line of code is
taking up 27% of your time.
You allocated this much amount
of memory at this point.
But often, especially if you're
looking at disassembly,
which we can also show,
you can have huge number of hits.
We're telling you about a lot of stuff.
And it's been tedious and painful
to navigate up and down the source
view or the disassembly view to
find what's the hottest frame.
Now, what's the second hottest?
Where was that hottest frame again?
So now, if you have the extended detail
view open and you're looking
at source or disassembly,
we will list all the
performance annotations,
descending or ascending,
it's your choice.
You can sort them.
And then you can use your
arrow keys or your mouse to
navigate amongst all of these.
The source views will scroll up
and down and will highlight the
selection that you're looking at.
This makes it really easy to
navigate the source and all
those performance annotations.
So that's the workflow improvements
we've added to Instruments.
So now let's talk about a brand
new concept that we've added to
the application called Strategies.
So what's a strategy?
A strategy is a way to take the data
that Instruments has gathered and
rotate it onto a different axis.
Now we've actually already been using
strategies no matter how long we've
been using Instruments because now we're
formally we're making the first default
view you see the Instrument Strategy.
So let's take a look at how this works.
Of course, the most common thing
in instruments is time,
and that's along the x-axis.
And in the instrument strategy,
we have instruments along the y-axis.
But we collect data on
other very important,
common types of things.
For example, cores.
So now we have a CPU strategy where
we list the CPUs on the y-axis.
Now, any instrument that knows anything
about a particular core has a place
in the track view to annotate it
with its information about that core.
And of course,
we also have a thread strategy now.
So we have threads listed on the y-axis,
all the threads all the
instruments have encountered,
and it gives an opportunity for any
instrument that knows anything about
a particular thread to annotate
that space in the track view.
So, what are the elements of a
strategy that you'll use?
Well, first of all,
if we're going to give
you multiple strategies,
we have to give you a
way to choose a strategy.
So we have a strategy chooser just below
the record button in the upper left.
To the right of that,
we have a series of highlight controls.
This allows you to highlight particular
data you might be interested in
and sort of gray out other data.
For example, show me everything about
a particular process,
a particular thread or set of threads.
Of course, the track view is a major
part of any strategy.
That's where most of the action happens.
And then we have this little legend
button over on the right hand side.
So various strategies will use
color to mean different things.
So if you want to find
out what a color means,
just click on the legend button
and you'll get a description.
So now let's look at the
CPU strategy in depth.
Why would I want to use a CPU strategy?
Well,
I might want to know how frequently,
for how long,
and on how many CPUs my code is running.
Now in doing this,
the CPU strategy can give you
a quick visual indication,
for example,
of whether you've achieved concurrency
and to what degree in your app.
It can also show you how you're
sharing the system and the
CPU resources with other processes.
So this is a screenshot of
the CPU strategy in action.
We zoomed in all the cores and stuff
so you could see them nicely here.
We took a simple single threaded app,
we threw it on multiple threads,
and we added a big lock
to guard all the data.
This actually is not
an uncommon approach.
Sometimes we see when apps are
taken to run multi-threading.
The problem is that we
see our samples in blue.
Blue, in this case,
indicates user stack frames.
We never see the same sample or blue
on multiple CPUs at the same time.
So you visually scan vertically
up and down all the cores,
and you want to see more blue aligned,
but we don't.
Instead, we see these troubling gaps.
Now, this is a time profile
across the entire system.
And so absolutely nothing
is happening in these gaps.
The CPUs aren't overburdened.
Your app simply--or this app
simply hasn't achieved concurrency.
What we want to see is
the ideal concurrency.
We see blue samples on
all cores all the time.
That would be the perfect world.
Now, our processes run on a system that
shares CPUs with other processes.
So even if you've achieved
and created the most elegant
concurrency model ever devised,
what you really see often
is something more like this.
The gray samples are samples
from other processes on a CPU.
And then you can see where
the CPUs have shifted over
and are processing your code.
And that's your samples.
And are leaved.
So fret not,
in this case we do have concurrency,
but we're sharing the
system with other processes.
So that is the CPU strategy.
And I'd like to invite Daniel Delwood
on stage to give us a demo of using
Time Profiler and the CPU strategy.
Daniel?
Thank you, Steve.
So I'd like to start out on the iPad,
just to show you an example
app that I'm working on.
All right.
So, oh, there it is.
Excellent.
So anyway,
this app-- application is showing me, uh,
loans.
So perhaps I'm a loan holder,
and I want to see what the effects of
the interest rate or the payment schedule
are on the amount I pay over 30 years.
And so I can go ahead
and drag this slider.
As I do so,
you'll notice it updates really slowly.
That's not a great experience.
And we want to actually improve that.
Now notice also there's
a concurrency slider.
Probably should turn that on now,
but it'll come back in the demo later.
So I'll switch back to the demo.
And I want to show some of
those workflow improvements
that Steve was talking about.
So here I am in Xcode,
and I've got my project open.
So how do I run it with Instruments?
Well, we've got a lot better
integration with Xcode 4,
and that's through the
use of Xcode 4 schemes.
Now, schemes are a combination of
both what you want to build
and then what you want to do,
what action.
So if I go up to the toolbar
and select Edit Scheme,
I get a sheet that pops down and
shows me what that scheme consists of.
So on the left side,
we've got a bunch of actions, run, test.
What we're interested in is profile.
Something interesting to note here
is that the build configuration
for profile is release by default.
Now this makes a lot of sense
because what you want to profile
is the application as close to
your release version to customers.
And so building with release
will usually compile with high
optimization and all that final,
to replicate the final bits
you'll be passing to customers.
The other thing you'll notice
is that the Instruments
template can be selected here.
And so by default it'll ask on launch,
but if you know you always
want to use the same template,
or perhaps you want to create a scheme
just for using a certain template,
you can do that here.
Now one thing I want to quickly
note about that build configuration
being release is that we need
debug information in Instruments.
And for all the default projects,
that's not an issue.
But if you have a legacy project or you
know you've changed your debug format,
you may want to make sure that
you set your debug information
format back to DWARF with ESIM.
It's all right.
I have my scheme.
How do I run it?
Well, from the Run menu, just pull down,
select Profile, and Xcode will go ahead
and build my application.
Launch Instruments, it asks me on launch,
and I'm going to use the
Time Profiler for this demo.
So my app starts in the background,
and I'm actually just going to move
that slider to generate some activity.
And you'll notice the track view
immediately starts updating with data.
Alright, that's probably enough.
And I want to tell you sort
of what you're seeing here and
how to work with this data.
So Time Profiler is all
about CPU utilization.
And every one millisecond by default,
it will take a back trace of
whatever code's running on the
cores of the target machine.
In this case, I've got an iPad 2,
and I've got two cores.
And so if I want to
scrub in the track view,
it's going to show me, by default,
the Instrument Strategy with
whatever the instrument finds
the most useful statistic.
So my application was
using about 96% of my CPU.
Excellent.
So how do I optimize?
Well, that's what the Detail View is for,
giving you a lot more
detailed information on what
the instrument collected.
And this is a call tree just aggregating
all of those back traces together.
So the top frame, by default,
is showing me that I made
a lot of message sends.
Excellent.
That doesn't tell me very much.
But if I want to use some of the
call tree options on the left here,
I can dive in more.
So I'm going to choose Uninvert to
see from a sort of a top-down view.
And you'll notice I have a
worker thread and a main thread.
And if I actually just want
to start turning these down,
you'll see that I'm using Dispatch.
OK.
Hm.
I wonder if I'm getting
good concurrency there.
Well,
there's a bunch of Dispatch frames here.
And I'm not really interested in them.
So I can just use one of those new call
tree options of control clicking and
selecting charge lib dispatch to callers.
And it no longer appears.
And now I can continue
with my investigation.
So here we go.
Oh, there we go.
Loan calculate data.
That's something I'm interested in.
And in fact,
I don't want to see the rest of the tree.
So I'm just going to go ahead
and select the focus arrow.
Okay, so now I'm looking at my code.
The code I even suspect is going
to be the one taking a lot of time,
and it indeed is.
And you'll notice that right above
this detail view is a jump bar,
much like Xcode Force.
And so if you want to get
back to where you came from,
you can just click back in the
jump bar and get right back there.
All right, so what do I see?
Well, I see a lot of NSNumber, NSDate,
NSDecimal number frames.
And I'm interested in that.
And if I'm going to optimize,
maybe I could use less wrappers.
I'm not sure.
But I'm also interested in how
I'm using the auto-release tool.
Perhaps I'm using that poorly.
So I'll hit Command-F.
And that find bar that Steve was
talking about jumps down.
So I'll type in auto-release.
And you'll see I've got
a pop auto-release pool.
But if I even want to jump
into sub-parts of this tree,
I can just select auto-expand
and start searching for it.
So here we are in a subject auto-release.
How many different places
in my code am I using this?
Or at least,
is it showing a pot in the time profile?
Well, I'll control-click on it,
and I can select focus on
all callers of auto-release.
Excellent.
And so you'll see that I have used
about 89 milliseconds in my application,
just calling auto-release.
So perhaps I need to do something
different with my object wrappers.
Now, that's a way to get a high level
view of sort of what my app's doing.
But how do I actually improve this?
Well, there's three different
things I could do.
First of all, I could do less work.
And that's probably the thing
I really want to look into.
Perhaps I need to calculate
the loans differently.
Maybe I need to calculate them less.
Second of all,
I could do my work more efficiently.
Maybe I should use a different algorithm.
And I can really look into that.
But third,
and what I want to show you today,
is doing that work concurrently.
So that's where the strategies come in.
And if I use the strategy
control on the top left,
I'm going to select CPU Strategy.
So the track view reconfigures to
show me both cores on my iPad 2,
as well as some data that looks
different from the previous view.
Now, this data is now showing me
each individual backtrace at
a one millisecond interval.
That's hard to see.
So I'm going to go ahead and
use the shift key and zoom in.
As I zoom in even further,
you'll notice that pattern
that Steve was talking about
of ping-ponging between cores.
So from core zero to core
one and back and forth,
I'm doing a lot of work,
but I'm not doing it at the same time.
So there really is an opportunity
for optimization here.
And we can see that very
quickly with the core strategy.
All right, so I know I actually have
that concurrency slider.
What happens when I use it?
So go ahead and turn it on and
start moving the percentage rate.
That's probably enough.
And you'll notice that the graph
looks a little bit different,
and if I just check the utilization,
it's about 160%. But let's go ahead
and take a look in the CPU strategy.
So I'll zoom in again.
And what we'll notice here is that
we actually are doing a lot more work
concurrently than we were before.
So we have a lot of work
on both cores 1 and 2,
and then there's some time that we're
only spending on a certain core.
Now if I'm curious what stacks are these,
I can go ahead and click on them,
or even double click to
bring up the sample list,
and it shows me a list of all
the samples with the call stack.
In this case,
I was recalculating my loans.
So, OK.
Excellent.
When I select one of these stacks,
you'll notice it turns yellow.
And if you're ever curious about what
something in the strategies mean,
you can always use the legend.
And the legend will show you that
red in this case means kernel,
yellow means selected,
and blue means user.
All right.
So I've achieved some
sort of concurrency,
but what was that bit about
that wasn't concurrent?
Well,
I can scroll through here a little bit,
and I see a lot of stacks that it
looks like were part of the chart view,
which are drawing in the main thread.
And if I'd really like to verify this,
I can go ahead and go to the pop-up
and select main thread to highlight
everything that's on the main thread.
And you'll notice in the detail view,
we have desaturated everything that
isn't on the main thread for you.
Now, this is great.
Because as you zoom out a little
bit using the control modifier,
you'll notice that lots of my other
threads were doing work concurrently,
and my main thread is where
I should optimize next.
So thank you very much.
That's a demo of using the CPU strategy,
and I'll pass it back to Steve.
Thank you, Daniel.
It was a great demo.
This is the CPU strategy.
And now let's move on to the
new profiling API that we're
introducing for Mac OS X programmatic
profiling for your use.
So this is called the
DT Performance Session Framework.
And it allows you to
programmatically target yourself,
that is the app actually calling the API,
or other processes in the entire system.
We've provided all of our major sets
of instrumentation for this framework:
Time Profiling, Allocations,
including allocations with Sambi support,
System Trace, Activity Monitor, Leaks.
And you can even have an API--
you even have an API that'll
allow you to programmatically
post flags to the timeline.
So when you're done using this framework,
you will have generated a DTPS,
DT Performance Session file.
And you open that file in Instruments.
But Instruments needs
the DSIMs that you have,
along with your binary,
and that file to fully make
sense of all the data collected.
So we ask that you don't rebuild
your binaries in between the time
you take a DTPerformance session
and you open it in Instruments.
Otherwise,
the data isn't going to be nearly
as good as it could have been.
Now,
this framework is located in Library,
Developer 4.0, Instruments Frameworks.
Pointing out the obvious,
this will not be on user systems,
so don't forget to not link
to this in the release build.
Okay, so why would you want
to use this framework?
Well, one of the things you can do is
programmatically profile something
only under extreme conditions.
Some instance where
something has gone awry,
you can just kick in profiling like that,
and then you'll have that data.
Or you might want to indicate
when extreme events have happened.
Oh, I lost network connectivity here.
And therefore,
when you look at the performance data,
you can interpret that data
along with keeping that in mind.
Or you might want to write, you know,
performance regression tests
around certain API and make sure
that from release to release,
you're not regressing a performance.
So how do you use it?
It's really simple.
So you create a session and
you add Instruments to it.
In this case, we're adding the
Time Profiler instrument.
And then you want to start
and stop the Profiler.
Now, you could do this just once.
You could start at the beginning,
you could stop it at the end.
That's perfectly fine.
But you can also start and
stop it repeatedly in certain
situations in your app.
It's up to you.
While doing so,
you can post signal flags.
Again,
you can note extraordinary events like,
oh,
network activity is lost or something.
Or you can say, hey,
here's the beginning of something and
here's the end of that same something.
And then when it's
visualized in Instruments,
we'll actually use that data to allow
you to quickly and easily time filter,
for example, along those boundaries.
It just helps you dive into
the data you collected.
When you're done,
you save the session out,
note where you saved it,
and then you open it in Instruments,
and it's as if you took the time profile,
for example, right from the app itself.
Now along with this framework,
we're shipping a new command line
called the iProfiler command line.
It's built entirely on the
DT Performance Session Framework.
It can do exactly the same things.
So if you'd rather work this into
your workflow from the command line,
in scripts, for example,
feel free to do so.
You can do either.
So that is the new API for profiling.
Now let's move on to System Trace.
Now we introduced System Trace last year,
but a lot has changed and improved.
The biggest news is that
it's now available for iOS 5.
This is pretty significant
to have this type of
instrumentation on an embedded OS.
And it's particularly timely now
that we have these dual core iPad 2s.
So when those games, for example,
are really pushing the system,
they can use System Trace to
squeeze out just a little bit more.
So System Trace is all about
providing a comprehensive
analysis of the entire system.
What are the threads doing
and why are they doing that?
What system calls am I making?
How long are they taking?
What VM operations are going on that
the system has to perform that might
affect my performance in my app?
So, of course, System Trace has a default
instrument strategy.
It has three instruments.
We have scheduling.
This is all of your thread information.
Then we have system calls.
And, of course, we have VM operations.
But things get very interesting when
you switch to the thread strategy view,
where we have threads in the vertical.
Now you can see a lot more
detail about what's going on.
When your clickers work.
There you go.
Okay.
So first of all,
we can show you thread context switches.
Now the arrows are colored
to indicate a particular CPU.
So how does a context switch work?
Well, you have a thread and eventually
it's context switched onto a CPU.
It's actually
The length of its run,
for that period of time,
it's called its tenure.
And then it will be switched off
because the CPU has to move on
to service some other thread.
And back and forth you go.
So those are context switches.
It's quite interesting to follow
the CPU around and see what it's
servicing at what point in time.
You can often see ping-ponging
instances where one thread is
switching context with another,
again and again and again.
That's inefficient,
so you might want to look
at why that's happening.
So we also have virtual memory events.
We cover a whole lot of them.
And we should stop here and sort
of describe what the virtual memory
system is and what it's doing.
So the system manages memory
in segments called pages.
And these become real with faults.
They're faulting in a page.
Now, these pages can actually be
shared amongst processes.
Okay, everything's good.
But then someone wants
to write to a page,
a shared page.
So what happens in that case?
Well, the system has to do some work.
It has to make a copy of the shared
page and assign it to the writer.
This is what we call a
copy on write page fault,
and it takes a little time.
So if you see a lot of these,
you think to yourself, am I causing this?
Is there something else I could do?
Now, in addition,
when pages are no longer used,
they're returned to the system.
And at some point in time,
somebody needs a new one.
So we reuse that page.
But it has the data from the previous
app in it or whoever wrote into it last,
so we don't want to share that.
So the system has to take
a zero fill page fault.
Again,
spending a little time writing zeros
in that page before it hands it back.
So page faults can take a little time,
minuscule really, but still can build up.
When the system is servicing
the needs of your app,
so you should take that
into consideration.
So we also show system calls.
Now system calls are calls from
user space into the kernel.
and they can take some time as well.
Kernel is very efficient at its job,
but some calls can take
longer than others.
You might want to think to yourself,
do I want to really take this time now?
Can I put it off,
do it at a different point,
a different juncture of
execution of my program?
So it's useful to see that information.
And finally,
System Trace will show you thread states.
A thread can be in many different
states for many different reasons.
It's not always running, for example.
So we show these states with colors.
Now a thread can be in a runnable state.
It's ready to go,
but there's no CPU there to handle it,
to service it.
Eventually a CPU comes along
and says I'm available,
the thread is context
switched on on that CPU,
runs for a while, and eventually it'll be
context switched off.
So this is the life of a thread,
and threads are always moving
in between these states,
and you should be aware of
when that happens and why.
So now I'd like to invite
Daniel back on stage for a demo of
using System Trace on the iPad 2.
Thank you very much, Steve.
All right, so I am going to start
on the iPad 2 here.
And I would like to show you
an app that is a lot of fun.
It is a Mandelbrot fractal drawing app.
And it's actually
pretty highly optimized.
I mean, it's done in software,
so we probably should do this on the GPU.
But for the purposes of this example,
we've optimized it using CPU,
or using the Time Profiler and
the CPU strategy to make sure it's
achieving concurrency and is very quick.
So, I'll calculate it.
And you'll notice it's
calculating from left to right,
doing scan lines, top to bottom.
And each thread is just picking
up a different scan line.
And when it completes,
it passes it to the main thread,
displays the image,
and that's what we see.
So, all right, how can I use System Trace
to analyze this?
I'll go back to the Mac.
And here we are in my project.
I'm just going to use that same
profile action from Xcode 4.
Compiles my application.
Launches Instruments.
And I'm going to select
the System Trace template.
Now, when I hit Profile,
you notice that Instruments really
doesn't do too terribly much.
So it's drawing in the background,
and I'll tell it to recalculate there.
And when I'm done,
I can just go ahead and say stop.
Now this is where
Instruments starts analyzing,
because the System Trace template,
by default, works in deferred mode.
And so that means that it tries to
stay off the CPU as much as it can,
do as little work as possible,
and keep out of your application's
way so that you get the best
performance metrics you can.
So what are we seeing here,
the first screen?
Well, this is a trace highlight showing
some high-level ideas of system usage,
context switches, and the like.
But if we really want more data,
we can start clicking on these
individual instruments and seeing
that the scheduling instrument shows
us time division ratios and how
much time the thread spent running
versus blocked versus interrupted,
that sort of thing.
System calls, much like its name,
will show us a count and duration,
and same with the VM operations.
But again,
all of this data isn't terribly
useful until you really combine
it with the thread strategy.
So in the top left,
I'll select the thread strategy.
And you'll notice that
we have a lot of data.
Now, how do you use System Trace?
Well, System Trace really requires some
thought on the part of the developer.
You need to come up with a mental
model of what's going on in your
application and use System Trace
to attempt to verify that.
Now, when you notice discrepancies,
that's when you have really good
opportunities for improvement.
So with our fractal drawer,
we really expect that we've got as
many threads as Dispatch will create,
namely two for a iPad 2.
And we'd expect that they're both
running as fast as they possibly can
until the completion of the drawing.
Well, looking at the thread strategy,
we'll immediately notice
that there's a lot more than
two Dispatch worker threads.
In fact, there's one, two, three, four,
five,
at least five Dispatch worker threads
just to draw it the first time.
Now, why is that?
Dispatch really is a great API.
Why is it creating more threads
than our number of CPUs?
Well, that's where we can zoom in here
and find out more information
about what all these events are.
So you'll notice that
there's a bunch of colors,
and these are all the thread states of
our different dispatch worker threads.
And if I show the legend,
this is a great reminder
for what they are,
unknown, running, supervisor, et cetera.
Now you'll also notice
a lot of events here,
and some of these are system calls.
So you'll notice by the phone,
it's a Mach system call,
and it has a stack trace
associated with it.
And here is a page cache
hit from the VM Instrument.
And so all of the Instruments are
contributing to this one view.
Now, for our application,
you'll notice all these
copy on write faults.
Copy on write.
That's why the cow is there.
But you'll notice here that we've got our
Mandelbrot renderer in the stack trace
on pretty much every single one of these.
Okay, so what could be going on?
Well, we're probably using
memory in a suboptimal way.
And we need to go back to the
drawing board of our mental model of
what's going on in our application.
So dispatch is stalling because we're
making all these copy on write faults.
And all we're doing is passing
that image back from each completed
scan line to the main thread.
Well, hmm, when we pass the image
back to the main thread,
it doesn't actually do the copy then.
It does the copy whenever
we touch the pages,
which would be when the the
next scan line continues on
its vertical progression.
Okay, that gives us an idea then.
Like, what happens if we did
horizontal scan lines?
Because the pages go horizontally,
and maybe that'll actually reduce
our number of copy on write faults.
So, let's go ahead and try that.
You'll notice that the
application actually had a left
to right and top to bottom.
And so it'll render
left to right to start.
I'm just going to switch
it to top to bottom.
And you'll have to trust me here,
but the millisecond timer at the
bottom showed around six seconds
for the first render and about
4.4 seconds for the second render.
So we actually did get a
really good speedup there,
and let's go ahead and verify
what we thought in System Trace.
So going back to the thread strategy.
We'll see again that we've got all
of these dispatch worker threads,
lots of cows, and lots of events,
lots of different thread states.
But once we get to that idle portion,
on the right,
There's only really two,
maybe three threads working very, very,
very hard.
So we've really actually
improved the situation.
It's closer to our model of
what should be happening,
and we have two threads running
as fast as they possibly can.
Now looking at these events,
we have a lot of zero fill faults here,
and this is something to be expected
when working with large pieces of memory,
because as Steve described,
when the VM system gives you a new page,
it has to fill it with zeros.
So either way,
we've both verified what we
thought was going to be happening,
as well as gained a
really good improvement,
over 20% in our application.
So thank you very much,
that's System Trace.
I hope you guys use it and like it.
Alrighty, that was pretty awesome.
Okay, so...
Let's move on to our network
instrumentation for iOS.
So we have two new Instruments for you.
One is called the
Network Connections Instrument.
This is all about looking at data volume
coming in and out over TCP and UDP.
You can use this to debug latency issues,
issues with drop packets, et cetera.
Here it is in all its glory.
It's tracking a spike in
incoming and outgoing traffic.
But we also have another
interesting Instrument called
the Network Activity Instrument.
We put this Instrument in the
Energy Diagnostics Template.
Now why would we do that?
Well,
that's because using radios takes power.
And when you use the network,
whether it's incoming or outgoing,
you want to use it as
efficiently as possible.
Because whenever you dribble
in or dribble out data,
the power's out-- if the
radios are already up,
cellular and Wi-Fi, for example,
you have to go into a higher power state,
then they handle the traffic,
and then eventually they go down.
They can't do this on a dime.
So this burns up extra power.
So if you can collect a
lot more networking data
coming in or out together,
then the radios can power down sooner,
not waste as much power,
the batteries will last longer,
and your customers will be happier,
and your customers are our customers,
so everybody's happy.
So that's the
Network Activity Instrument.
I encourage you to take a look at it.
It's very interesting.
Now finally,
we'd like to conclude with our
Arc Instrumentation support.
So,
We've introduced Arc at
the conference this week,
and the support that we'll be
talking about in Instruments
will be in the next seat.
So what is Arc again?
It's automatic reference counting.
Essentially,
this is the compiler taking the burden of
retains and releases and auto releases,
all that bookkeeping,
off your shoulders and doing it itself,
more precisely.
This allows you to focus on the
relationships between the objects
in your app as you think of them
for the purposes of your app,
not for the purpose of managing memory.
Now, as with anything,
it's not a panacea.
You still can have leaks in some spots,
and you can leak graphs of
objects or cycles of objects.
But this is where Instruments and the
new support we've introduced comes in.
Now, Instruments,
as I'm sure you're all aware,
has an instrument called
a leaks instrument.
This will find memory you've allocated
for which you no longer have a reference.
And for Arc support,
we're introducing cycle
detection as well.
So what's all this about?
Well, here you have your and you have
your object graph laid out and
you have references to everything.
But some point along the way,
a critical reference is released.
And perhaps that will cause an
entire cycle of objects to be leaked.
They're lost.
They're out there taking up who knows
how much memory away from your app
and all the other apps in the system.
In your main memory,
all your other references
have nothing back to them.
So they're going to stay
there until your app exits.
So when you're using the Lix
Instrument and when you're
designing your apps and using Arc,
what you need to remember is
probably you really have Arc objects,
automatic reference counting objects,
and you might still have some
manually reference counted objects.
So you have a legacy old school
framework that you've been
using as part of your app and it
hasn't been converted over yet.
And amongst all those objects,
Arc and MRC will be references.
And along the way you can leak graphs,
complex graphs of objects.
Well, Instruments can look at those and
detect the fundamental cycles.
It'll find the graph itself,
all the leaks,
and isolate the fundamental cycles.
And it will define for you all the
I of Rs that point to which objects.
So A points to B with a certain I of R,
and B points to C with a certain I of R,
and so forth.
This provides you the information
that you need to surgically determine
in place perhaps a zeroing weak
reference to eliminate that cycle.
That cycle goes away.
And you proceed down your list
of cycles in Instruments to get
rid of all the other cycles.
Until finally, again,
if you were interacting
with some MRC code,
you have some stragglers,
you use your normal leaks workflow,
and you identify where you
need to put a release in,
you do it,
and then your app is leak free.
So to demonstrate this
awesome technology,
I'd like to invite Daniel back on stage.
Daniel Delwood,
Thank you very much, Steve.
So for this demo,
we're actually just going to be using
a very simple application on Mac OS X.
And it's just actually working
on-- I've written a custom
tree node implementation.
And so it's working on showing whether
that actually works right in an outline
view and just how the tree node works.
And so I can create one.
I can replace it.
And it's just randomly
creating different trees.
And hopefully, these will all be released
properly when I replace the tree.
But as you can see, the outline view is
working pretty much right.
So I'm running Arc.
This is excellent.
I didn't have to think
about retain and release.
But can I still leak?
As Steve was talking about, yeah.
So I'll use the profile action
and select the leaks template.
And Instruments pops up showing me
both two instruments in the template.
Allocations,
which will get me the malloc-free retain,
release, and auto-release events,
but the leaks instrument as well.
And so as I actually create and
replace some of these trees,
some bigger and some smaller,
you notice that leaks will
eventually kick in in the background
and notice if I have any leaks.
And so there it is, a lot of leaks.
I'll go ahead and stop.
So I select the leaks instrument.
And by default,
the leaks instrument shows
us leaks by backtrace.
And this is for a world
of manual retain counting.
You have a bunch of different leaks,
and some of them happen at
the same place multiple times.
This is because you have probably
a missing release or some flaw in
your code that's going to do the
same thing over and over again.
So we try to help you out by
aggregating those into the
backtrace where they're created.
But this really doesn't tell
you much about the leak.
Does this array reference a tree node?
Does a tree node reference
another tree node?
That's what the cycle detection's for.
So from the jump bar,
I'm just going to pull
down and select cycles.
And here we go.
So it's finding the cycles
inside of our leaked graph.
Now, you notice that I had some bigger
trees and some smaller trees.
And so actually,
we had a really complex cycle
there because one node was
holding onto another node.
And the idea is that we would
like to make this as usable
as possible for developers.
And we identify the simple
cycles within the complex cycle.
And so if we turn these open,
you'll notice that what's
shown on the left is exactly
the graph shown on the right.
We have a tree node, which has a children
mutable array property.
And that mutable array has a
reference to its list of objects,
which has some malloc bytes,
which also point to
eventually a tree node.
And that children,
that child node of that
original tree node,
actually has a parent pointer,
which isn't surprising.
But the important part to
notice here is that it's red.
And that's because it's
a strong reference.
Now,
you'll notice we have red and blue here.
And that's because arc works with
strong references and weak references.
And you're going to be living in a world
that has both manual retain counting
as well as automatic retain counting.
And so those manual retain
counting references,
we can't tell for sure
that they're strong.
And so we'll display
those to you in blue.
They're very likely strong references.
But as your project gets
converted over to arc and more
and more of your frameworks do,
you'll notice that more and more
of these become red and the cycle
analysis becomes more accurate.
Now, the great part of this is that if
you're running manually retain counting,
the cycle detector should
work for you as well.
So, how do we go ahead and fix this?
Well, we could break any one of these,
but it probably makes the most sense
to break this parent reference.
So I'm just going to go ahead and
double click on the reference.
And Xcode popped to the front.
And you'll notice here that
it's taken me to the declaration
of my tree node interface.
And I've got my children property and,
oh, there's the parent.
But I didn't declare it week.
Now, if I had a property,
I could just declare week there,
but I'm actually just setting
this in the initializer.
So, in the Ivar declaration,
I just put in the magic keyword week.
And I'll hit profile.
And this time, those up references will
be zeroing weak pointers,
even safer than the just
unretained pointers before.
And so as I create my tree nodes,
you'll notice that the
outline view updates properly,
still works right,
and we'll notice in the background
that Instruments detected no leaks.
So we solved all of those just
by solving that one cycle,
which was repeated.
So, thank you very much.
Hope you guys really
enjoy the cycle detector.
Thank you, Daniel.
That was pretty awesome, too.
Well, we're already towards
the end of the session.
In conclusion, we're thrilled with the
instrumentation that we've been
able to provide you in this release.
It's going to allow you to
create far more concurrent code,
to use System Trace to make
your code run more efficiently.
It provides you this
programmatically API that you can
look for performance regressions.
And now we have this excellent
ARC support to detect leaked cycles
and support your ARC development.
So, for further information,
you can turn to Michael Jurowicz,
the Developer Tools and
Performance Evangelist.
You can also turn to our documentation,
which we are actively working on.
And you can go to devforums.apple.com
and ask questions,
where you'll get answers from
your peers here in the audience,
in your industry,
the engineers here on stage,
and back at Apple.
So there's some interesting new sessions
for the rest of the week that you might
want to attend focused on performance.
They'll be using Instruments as well.
Thank you very much for
coming and have a good week.